Add descriptions of configurations to the docs (#725)
ACCESS-NRI/access-esm1.6-configs: documentation/docs/pages/configs_experiments/configurations/amip.md

> The amip configuraton is an uncoupled atmosphere only configuration of ESM1.6, used to simulate atmospheric conditions between 1979-2022 using prescribed sea surface temperatures, sea ice concentrations, and atmospheric forcings.

Reviewer: I'm not sure uncoupled is a good descriptor? 

I think just saying prescribed sst/sic is ok, but could also say its a configuration without interactive ocean and sea ice models ?

Author: That sounds good to me, I've changed this to:
```
The amip configuraton is an atmosphere only configuration of ESM1.6, used to simulate atmospheric conditions between 1979-2022 using prescribed sea surface temperatures, sea ice concentrations, and atmospheric forcings. This configuration does not include interactive ocean and sea ice models.
```

> The amip configuraton is an uncoupled atmosphere only configuration of ESM1.6, used to simulate atmospheric conditions between 1979-2022 using prescribed sea surface temperatures, sea ice concentrations, and atmospheric forcings.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The amip configuraton is an atmosphere-land configuration of ESM1.6, used to simulate atmospheric conditions between 1979-2022 using prescribed sea surface temperatures, sea ice concentrations, and atmospheric forcings.
```

Author: Thanks! Added in

> The amip configuration is set up from the [historical+concentrations](/configs_experiments/configurations/historical+concentrations) configuration by deactivating ocean and sea ice models and disabling the coupling.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The amip configuration is set up from the [historical+concentrations](/configs_experiments/configurations/historical+concentrations) configuration by deactivating ocean and sea ice models and disabling the coupler.
```

This configuration is used for the [CMIP7 amip experiment](https://airtable.com/embed/apphXCUgASIeT6jCz/shrCs1cSWzQRV0v4i/tblbT6XAdQYOCMXu7/viwUXPlXGkKPiFTgB/recPovziGiiALZQUj).

## Inputs

> The amip configuration uses the same input files as the [historical+concentrations](/configs_experiments/configurations/historical+concentrations) configuration to provide time varying forcings to the the atmosphere and land models for years 1979-2022. Two additional files prescribe observed sea surface temperatures and sea ice concentrations:

Reviewer: Possibly note 'same input files' only applies to the atmosphere input files?

Reviewer 2: Is it worth having sub-sections under all the Inputs headers, in all configurations, for each part of the inputs? Atmosphere, land, ocean, sea-ice, restart (and other headers if needed)? Then, under each section have a short sentence to describe what the input is. In this case, atmosphere and land would say "same as historical+concentrations", ocean would say prescribed SSTs (do we want to give the source of the prescribed SST? Is that from a UM simulation? Is that from an observational or reanalysis product? Is that provided by CMIP in input4MIPS?), etc.

Author: Good idea, added in!

Author: > Is it worth having sub-sections under all the Inputs headers, in all configurations, for each part of the inputs? Atmosphere, land, ocean, sea-ice, restart (and other headers if needed)? 

I've added sub-sections to the "Inputs" section. I'm hoping to include a brief sentence describing each input but will need to get some help from @MartinDix or @penguian for several of them. For more detailed descriptions of the data sources and processing of each input, would it be best placed in the (not yet written) [inputs](https://access-nri.github.io/access-esm1.6-configs/pr-previews/725/inputs/atmosphere/) page?

> The amip configuration uses the same input files as the [historical+concentrations](/configs_experiments/configurations/historical+concentrations) configuration to provide time varying forcings to the the atmosphere and land models for years 1979-2022. Two additional files prescribe observed sea surface temperatures and sea ice concentrations:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The amip configuration uses the same input files as the [historical+concentrations](/configs_experiments/configurations/historical+concentrations) configuration to provide time varying forcings to the atmosphere and land models for years 1979-2022. Two additional files prescribe observed sea surface temperatures and sea ice concentrations:
```

Author: Thanks for catching that, added in!

* amip_sst_n96_greg.pp: Sea surface temperatures

> * amip_seaice_n96_greg.pp: Sea ice concentrations

Reviewer: do we have code to generate these ?

Author: Once the [PR](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/ancillary-file-science/pull/2) for the sst/sea ice generation code is merged I'll add a link to it!

## Key settings

> Settings are copied from the [historical+concentrations](/configs_experiments/configurations/historical+concentrations) configuration with changes to deactivate the coupling, to add prescribed SSTs and sea ice concentrations, and to deactivate the coupled CO2 tracers.

Reviewer 2: Is it possible to deactivate the coupling and leave the coupled CO2 tracers active? Seems weird to have to do both. I could imagine turning off the CO2 coupling but keeping the rest but I would hope that deactivating the coupling would deactivate the CO2 coupling as well.

Author: I've just run a few tests, and it looks like it's possible to leave the tracer variables active while deactivating the coupling. 

When setting up amip restarts, we currently [delete these tracers from the restart](https://forum.access-hive.org.au/t/create-an-amip-restart-from-a-coupled-restart/5261#p-17790-h-2-removing-the-coupled-fields-2). To keep the tracers active, we need to leave them in the restart by omitting 33001 and 33002 from the `um_fields_subset` command. 

You can then skip the namelist changes under the `Deactivating tracers` heading. 

Comparing 1 month runs, the physical climate looks identical:
<img width="441" height="332" alt="download-24" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f557c35e-3341-4456-ac57-dd29691fe1d2" />

You do get differences in the CO2 flux from the ocean tracer, which would be expected. Though I'm not sure where it gets the values from in either case. Neither should have any meaningful data.

<img width="773" height="348" alt="download-25" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a31238de-b1c0-4851-a909-7b9bc59c3cf2" />

I'm guessing there could have been a reason to remove them from the amip configurations in the past, but not 100% sure what. Perhaps there's a performance benefit from removing the them?

Reviewer 2: Thanks for checking.

...
+ &UPANCA ANC_REF_NO=27, PERIOD=3, INTERVAL=1 /
+ &UPANCA ANC_REF_NO=28, PERIOD=3, INTERVAL=1 /
+ &UPANCA ANC_REF_NO=29, PERIOD=3, INTERVAL=1 /
```
The `L_SICE/L_SSICE` options control how the sea ice albedo is calculated in the atmosphere model. The `&UPANCA` lines set the frequency at which the atmosphere model updates its sea ice fraction (`ANC_REF_NO=27`) and sea surface temperature (`ANC_REF_NO=28`) via linear interpolation. Sea ice depth (`ANC_REF_NO=29`) is calculated in the model based on the prescribed concentration, and is also updated at the frequency specified here. See the [historical+emissions](/configs_experiments/configurations/historical+emissions/#greenhouse-gas-emissions-and-concentrations) configuration for details on controling the linear interpolation.

#### atmosphere/um_env.yaml
```diff
+ SSTIN: INPUT/amip_sst_n96_greg.pp
+ SICEIN: INPUT/amip_seaice_n96_greg.pp
```
The above settings point the model to the SST and sea ice concentration ancillary files in the `payu` work directory.

### Deactivating tracers
Coupled ESM1.6 configurations include two 3D atmospheric tracers which track atmospheric CO2 originating from the land and ocean respectively.

> These tracers aren't aren't used in the amip configuration and are deactivated with the following changes:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These tracers aren't used in the amip configuration and are deactivated with the following changes:
```

This configuration is used for the [CMIP7 amip experiment](https://airtable.com/embed/apphXCUgASIeT6jCz/shrCs1cSWzQRV0v4i/tblbT6XAdQYOCMXu7/viwUXPlXGkKPiFTgB/recPovziGiiALZQUj).

Please note that the settings described below are implemented in the configuration and no further changes are required to run it. The descriptions below are included to aid in understanding of the configuration and to assist with making modifications.

## Inputs
The amip configuration uses the same atmosphere and land input files as the [historical](/configs_experiments/configurations/historical) configuration to provide time varying forcings to the atmosphere and land models for years 1979-2022.

### Atmosphere
Two additional files provide observed sea surface temperatures and sea ice concentrations to the atmosphere model:

* sst_amip_n96_gregorian.anc: Sea surface temperatures in units K, with values adjusted via the [Karl Taylor procedure](https://pcmdi.llnl.gov/report/pdf/60.pdf).
* seaice_amip_n96_gregorian.anc : Sea ice concentrations in units [0,1], with values adjusted via the [Karl Taylor procedure](https://pcmdi.llnl.gov/report/pdf/60.pdf).

### Restart

> The amip configuration use the 1978 atmosphere restart file produced by the historical experiment. Ocean, sea ice, and coupler restart files are removed, and coupling related fields are removed from the atmosphere restart.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The amip configuration uses the 1978 atmosphere restart file produced by the historical experiment after removal of the coupling related fields. Ocean, sea ice, and coupler restart files are removed.
```

Author: Thanks, I've added in this change

## Key settings

Settings are copied from the [historical](/configs_experiments/configurations/historical) configuration with changes to deactivate the coupling, to add prescribed SSTs and sea ice concentrations, and to deactivate the coupled CO2 tracers.

> The following differences are shown with respect to the [historical](/configs_experiments/configurations/historical) configuration:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following differences are shown with respect to the [historical](/configs_experiments/configurations/historical) configuration.
```

### Prescribed SSTs and sea ice

The following settings configure the atmospheric model to use prescribed SSTs and sea ice concentrations from the input files:

#### atmosphere/namelists
```diff
&NLSIZES
...
- NICE=5,
+ NICE=1,

&NLSTCATM
- L_SSICE_ALBEDO=.TRUE.,
- L_SICE_MELTPONDS=.TRUE.,
- L_SICE_SCATTERING=.TRUE.,
- L_SICE_HADGEM1A=.TRUE.,
+ L_SSICE_ALBEDO=.FALSE.,
+ L_SICE_MELTPONDS=.FALSE.,
+ L_SICE_SCATTERING=.FALSE., 
+ L_SICE_HADGEM1A=.FALSE.,

&ANCILCTA
+ LAMIPII=.TRUE.,
...
+ &UPANCA ANC_REF_NO=27, PERIOD=3, INTERVAL=1 /
+ &UPANCA ANC_REF_NO=28, PERIOD=3, INTERVAL=1 /
+ &UPANCA ANC_REF_NO=29, PERIOD=3, INTERVAL=1 /
```

> The `L_SICE/L_SSICE` options control how the sea ice albedo is calculated in the atmosphere model. The `&UPANCA` lines set the frequency at which the atmosphere model updates its sea ice fraction (`ANC_REF_NO=27`) and sea surface temperature (`ANC_REF_NO=28`) via linear interpolation. Sea ice depth (`ANC_REF_NO=29`) is calculated in the model based on the prescribed concentration, and is also updated at the frequency specified here. See the [esm-historical](/configs_experiments/configurations/esm-historical/#greenhouse-gas-emissions-and-concentrations) configuration for details on controling the linear interpolation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `L_SICE/L_SSICE` options control how the sea ice albedo is calculated in the atmosphere model. The `&UPANCA` lines set the frequency at which the atmosphere model updates its sea ice fraction (`ANC_REF_NO=27`) and sea surface temperature (`ANC_REF_NO=28`) via linear interpolation (see details on the linear interpolation in the [esm-historical](/configs_experiments/configurations/esm-historical/#greenhouse-gas-emissions-and-concentrations) configuration). Sea ice depth (`ANC_REF_NO=29`) is calculated in the model, at the frequency specified here, based on the prescribed concentration. 
```

#### atmosphere/um_env.yaml
```diff
+ SSTIN: INPUT/amip_sst_n96_greg.pp
+ SICEIN: INPUT/amip_seaice_n96_greg.pp
```

> The above settings point the model to the SST and sea ice concentration ancillary files in the `payu` work directory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The above settings specify the SST and sea ice concentration ancillary files for the model.
```

@blimlim Why do the files change name between the inputs section and here: `sst_amip_n96_gregorian.anc` and `amip_sst_n96_greg.pp`?

Reviewer 2: In the other configurations, we don't list the changes about input files in the code changes. We only list them in the inputs. Is there a reason for the difference for amip? Listing all the input changes in the code changes is probably quite long in other configurations but maybe it is worth it for completeness?

Author: >@blimlim Why do the files change name between the inputs section and here: sst_amip_n96_gregorian.anc and amip_sst_n96_greg.pp?

Thanks for catching that, I'd gotten mixed up halfway through between the CMIP6 files and the CMIP7 files which aren't yet ready. I've swapped back to the CMIP6 version, as that's what the configuration currently uses and we can update it when the new files are finalised.

> In the other configurations, we don't list the changes about input files in the code changes

We do have the corresponding code changes for esm-historical and esm-flat10, it's just missing for the historical config. All other configs/experiments don't change the input files.

I've added the `um_env.yaml` changes to the historical configuration for consistency.

Author: > I'd gotten mixed up halfway through between the CMIP6 files and the CMIP7 files which aren't yet ready.

The new ssts and sea ice files are now in the config. I've updated the names here to match

### Deactivating tracers
Coupled ESM1.6 configurations include two 3D atmospheric tracers which track atmospheric CO2 originating from the land and ocean respectively.
These tracers aren't used in the amip configuration and are deactivated with the following changes:

#### atmosphere/namelists
```diff
&NLSIZES
...
-TR_VARS=0,
+TR_VARS=2,

&STSHCOMP
...
-TCA=2,2,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,
+TCA=0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,

&NLSTCATM
- L_BL_TRACER_MIX=.TRUE.,
+ L_BL_TRACER_MIX=.FALSE.,

- L_CO2_TRACER=.TRUE.,
- L_TRACER_MASS=.TRUE.,
+ L_CO2_TRACER=.FALSE.,
+ L_TRACER_MASS=.FALSE.,
```

### Deactivating coupling

> The following settings relate to the oasis coupling used to couple the atmosphere, ocean, and sea ice submodels. As the coupling isn't used in the amip configuration, they are either deactivated or removed:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following settings relate to the OASIS coupler used to couple the atmosphere, ocean, and sea ice submodels. As the coupling isn't used in the amip configuration, they are either deactivated or removed:
```
Or "OASIS3-MCT"

The amip configuration is set up from the [historical](/configs_experiments/configurations/historical) configuration by deactivating ocean and sea ice models and disabling the coupler.

This configuration is used for the [CMIP7 amip experiment](https://airtable.com/embed/apphXCUgASIeT6jCz/shrCs1cSWzQRV0v4i/tblbT6XAdQYOCMXu7/viwUXPlXGkKPiFTgB/recPovziGiiALZQUj).

Please note that the settings described below are implemented in the configuration and no further changes are required to run it. The descriptions below are included to aid in understanding of the configuration and to assist with making modifications.

## Inputs
The amip configuration uses the same atmosphere and land input files as the [historical](/configs_experiments/configurations/historical) configuration to provide time varying forcings to the atmosphere and land models for years 1979-2022.

### Atmosphere
Two additional files provide observed sea surface temperatures and sea ice concentrations to the atmosphere model:

* amip_sst_n96_greg.pp: Sea surface temperatures
* amip_seaice_n96_greg.pp: Sea ice concentrations

### Restart

> The amip configuration uses atmposphere restart files taken from the historical experiment.

Reviewer 2: Do we need to specify which year of the historical is taken for the restart?

Author: Added this in eadb8c4, we will need to update this later on as we plan to add the scripts for setting up the initial restart to the config

&NLSTCATM
- L_BL_TRACER_MIX=.TRUE.,
+ L_BL_TRACER_MIX=.FALSE.,

- L_CO2_TRACER=.TRUE.,
- L_TRACER_MASS=.TRUE.,
+ L_CO2_TRACER=.FALSE.,
+ L_TRACER_MASS=.FALSE.,
```

### Deactivating coupling
The following settings relate to the oasis coupling used to couple the atmosphere, ocean, and sea ice submodels. As the coupling isn't used in the amip configuration, they are either deactivated or removed:

#### atmosphere/um_env.yaml
```diff
- AUSCOM_CPL: 'true'
+ AUSCOM_CPL: 'false'
```

#### atmosphere/namelists
```diff
- L_OASIS=.TRUE.,
+ L_OASIS=.FALSE.,
```

#### atmosphere/input_atm.nml
```diff
&coupling
- access_tfs=-1.8
- xfactor=1.0
- ocn_sss=.false.
- sdump_enable=.false.
- rdump_enable=.false.
 ocean_albedo_factor=0.92
```

## Configuration scripts

The amip configuration uses the same land use change userscript as the [historical](/configs_experiments/configurations/historical) configuration to update surface type fractions at the end of each year:

#### config.yaml
```yaml
userscripts:
    # Apply land use changes after each run
    run: ./scripts/update_landuse_driver.sh
```
Note that this script requires the run length to be 1 year in order to work properly. 

> 

Reviewer 2: It's not very important, but do we simply want to say "same as historical" instead of copying the part of the payu config? It seems it would be coherent with what we do for restarts and inputs.

Author: That makes sense to me, I've added this in now
